README.md, before:

# Form5

## Requirements

* CSS modules
* React 17+

This package distributes JSX so you can decide how it gets compiled.

## Demo

[https://JakobJingleheimer.github.io/react-form5](https://jakobjingleheimer.github.io/react-form5)

## Key features

Use what you want. No component requires any other component (ex `<Form>` works just fine with plain `<input>`, `<select>`, etc). You can also use the utilities that underpin `<Form>` without the react component itself (you're free to re-invent the wheel), just import them and go:

```js
import composeData from 'react-form5/composeData';
import deepDiff from 'react-form5/deepDiff';
```

### Just the tip

A good practice in data management is to keep it minimal. When changing data, it's generally best to track only what changed (especially important for large data models). Out of the box, Form5 provides a deep diff to `<Form>`'s onSubmit handler.

### Model for model

Form5 supports a 1:1 DOM to data model mapping: To create nested data objects, use a plain old `<fieldset>`; when a `name` prop is supplied, the data object provided to `onSubmit` will nest fields inside under that name. [See examples below](#component-consumption).

### Native

This package leverages as much native APIs as possible: HTML5's [Constraints Validation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/HTML5/Constraint_validation), CSS variables, latest media queries and properties, etc. Anything that doesn't is as closely aligned and friendly as possible to any existing native APIs (with a couple small but personally frustrating exceptions—the lesser of two evils).

### Performance

Performance was one of the main reasons I created this; I was gobsmacked by the _horrendous_ performance of leading libs \*cough\* formik \*cough\*; that may not be the case anymore (I haven't checked). There are no redundant/superfluous re-renders etc from this package and no divitis.

## Usage

This package encourages/supports (and enforces a bit) accessibility. It leverages the native [Constraints Validation API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/HTML5/Constraint_validation), and very rudimentary structural styling via [CSS Grid Layout](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Grid_Layout).

State can be controlled or uncontrolled without impacting the validation this package facilitates.

### Styling configuration

General layout structure and basic validation state appearance is handled by this package. There are some css variables that are consumed if available:

css var | purpose
:--- | :---
`--colour-background` | field background colour
`--colour-danger` | borders and text colours when field has invalid input
`--colour-light` | icon-based button background colour
`--colour-medium` | default border colours,
`--colour-muted` | disabled & readonly field's label
`--colour-primary` | submit button
`--colour-success` | success button colour
`--colour-text-deemphasised` | label text and border colour of disabled fields
`--colour-warning` | background colour of a "warning" button
`--default-border-radius` | field corner rounding
`--default-boxshadow` | drop shadow on buttons and fields
`--default-padding` | inner spacing of fields and minimum inner spacing for buttons
`--default-transition` | css transitions applied to changes on buttons and fields
`--grid-gutter` | space between css grid layout cells (labels + fields, fields + fields)

Labels of fields set to required are automatically styled with an "*" in an accessibility-friendly way.

Implementer's css modules are consumed via css modules (passed as normal via `className`).

### Component consumption

If a field is supplied validation props (`minLength`, `required`, etc), the component will automatically trigger its fields ("form controls") to self-validate and display relevant errors upon submit. Each field supports supplying custom validation messages via the Constraints Validation API—when no custom message(s) are supplied, browser defaults (which are pretty good and support i18n for free) are used. A Form submitted with invalid fields will abort the submission (the supplied `onSubmit` callback will not be called).

Any props not specific to this package are passed to the relative element.

```jsx
import Form, {
  Button,
  FileInput,
  Input,
} from 'react-form5';

import AddressService from '../AddressService.js';
import ClientsService from '../ClientsService.js';

import yourCustomStyles from './something.module.css';


const validateAddress = (event) => {
  const { target } = event;
  const isInvalid = AddressService.validate(target.value);
  let msg = 'Address is not recognised';

  if (isInvalid) {
    if (typeof msg === 'boolean') msg = isInvalid;

    target.setCustomValidity(msg);
    target.reportValidity(); // required because reasons
  }
};

const validateDomain = (event) => {
  const { target } = event;
  const isInvalid = ClientsService.validate(target.value);
  let msg = 'Email address is not allowed';

  if (isInvalid) {
    if (typeof msg === 'boolean') msg = isInvalid;

    target.setCustomValidity(msg);
    target.reportValidity(); // required because reasons
  }
};

const sendToCloud = (
  delta,
  {
    forename,
    surname,
    contactDetails: {
      email,
      tel,
    },
    newsletterOptIn,
  },
  event,
) => {
  return fetch(…);
};

const SFC = (props) => (
  <Form
    className={yourCustomStyles.SignupForm}
    name="signup"
    onSubmit={sendToCloud}
  >
    <Input
      name="forename"
      minLength={2}
      placeholder="Jane"
      required
      type="text"
    />
    <Input
      name="surname"
      minLength={2}
      placeholder="Smith"
      required
      type="text"
    />
    <fieldset name="contactDetails">
      <Input
        name="email"
        onBlur={validateDomain}
        placeholder="jane@example.com"
        type="email"
      />
      <Input
        as="textarea"
        name="mailingAddress"
        onChange={validateAddress}
      />
      <Input
        name="tel"
        placeholder="5555555555"
        type="tel"
      />
    </fieldset>
    <Input
      name="newsletterOptIn"
      type="checkbox"
      variant={Input.VARIANTS.TOGGLE}
    />
    <Button
      appearance={Button.APPEARANCES.BASIC}
      type="submit"
    />
  </Form>
)
```

#### `<Form>`

This component facilitates validation and provides a data model object for uncontrolled fields. Fields wrapped in a name `fieldset` result in a nested object.

It also provides a `delta` of data changes, useful for `PATCH`ing existing field(s) changed by the user: the delta object contains only properties differing from their initial value. Ex an existing user changes their forename: `delta = { forename: 'Jakob' }`

#### `<Button>`

The most important difference here is the `type` prop defaults to `button` instead of `submit` because forgetting to override "submit" has confusing, adverse behaviour.

Button supports the following configuration via props:

prop | purpose | default
:--- | :--- | :---
appearance | alter the aesthetics of the element | `primary`
fluid | whether the button should act like a liquid: fill its container | `false`
variant | the kind of appearance the button takes on (classic CTA, icon, etc) | `cta`

#### `<FileInput>`

A file picker for uploading from disk. The main difference between this component and this package's `<Input>` component is that it generates a preview for image-type files or lists filenames of selected files (when a preview cannot be generated).

#### `<Input>`

This component is a thin wrapper for native `label` and form fields (`input`, `select`, `textarea`)
that helps to ensure accessibility and facilitate validation. It leverages `onBlur` and `onChange`
listeners to track `pristine` and `touched` (to avoid erroneously invalidating the field); its
internal handlers are first called and then handlers passed via props.

To create a list of values within a single property, append `[]` to the `name` attribute, like `<Input name="foo[]" />`; to avoid conflicting with the likes of react, a number may optionally be included within the brackets, like `<Input name="foo[0]" />`, but the number (index) itself will be ignored (sequence in data objects is determined by the input's place in the DOM).

`<input>` also offers a small easter-egg: a toggle, which is effectively a checkbox with fancy styling.

prop | purpose | default
:--- | :--- | :---
arrangement | the fields position relative to its field | `inline`
as | the element or react component to use | `input`
variant | display a checkbox as a toggle | `null`

Commit message:

chore: add new pristine etc to README

README.md, after:

# Form5

## Requirements

* CSS modules
* React 17+

This package distributes JSX so you can decide how it gets compiled.

## Demo

[https://JakobJingleheimer.github.io/react-form5](https://jakobjingleheimer.github.io/react-form5)

## Key features

Use what you want. No component requires any other component (ex `<Form>` works just fine with plain `<input>`, `<select>`, etc). You can also use the utilities that underpin `<Form>` without the react component itself (you're free to re-invent the wheel), just import them and go:

```js
import composeData from 'react-form5/composeData';
import deepDiff from 'react-form5/deepDiff';
```

### Just the tip

A good practice in data management is to keep it minimal. When changing data, it's generally best to track only what changed (especially important for large data models). Out of the box, Form5 provides a deep diff to `<Form>`'s onSubmit handler.

### Model for model

Form5 supports a 1:1 DOM to data model mapping: To create nested data objects, use a plain old `<fieldset>`; when a `name` prop is supplied, the data object provided to `onSubmit` will nest fields inside under that name. [See examples below](#component-consumption).

### Native

This package leverages as much native APIs as possible: HTML5's [Constraints Validation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/HTML5/Constraint_validation), CSS variables, latest media queries and properties, etc. Anything that doesn't is as closely aligned and friendly as possible to any existing native APIs (with a couple small but personally frustrating exceptions—the lesser of two evils).

### Performance

Performance was one of the main reasons I created this; I was gobsmacked by the _horrendous_ performance of leading libs \*cough\* formik \*cough\*; that may not be the case anymore (I haven't checked). There are no redundant/superfluous re-renders etc from this package and no divitis.

## Usage

This package encourages/supports (and enforces a bit) accessibility. It leverages the native [Constraints Validation API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/HTML5/Constraint_validation), and very rudimentary structural styling via [CSS Grid Layout](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Grid_Layout).

State can be controlled or uncontrolled without impacting the validation this package facilitates.

### Styling configuration

General layout structure and basic validation state appearance is handled by this package. There are some css variables that are consumed if available:

css var | purpose
:--- | :---
`--colour-background` | field background colour
`--colour-danger` | borders and text colours when field has invalid input
`--colour-light` | icon-based button background colour
`--colour-medium` | default border colours,
`--colour-muted` | disabled & readonly field's label
`--colour-primary` | submit button
`--colour-success` | success button colour
`--colour-text-deemphasised` | label text and border colour of disabled fields
`--colour-warning` | background colour of a "warning" button
`--default-border-radius` | field corner rounding
`--default-boxshadow` | drop shadow on buttons and fields
`--default-padding` | inner spacing of fields and minimum inner spacing for buttons
`--default-transition` | css transitions applied to changes on buttons and fields
`--grid-gutter` | space between css grid layout cells (labels + fields, fields + fields)

Labels of fields set to required are automatically styled with an "*" in an accessibility-friendly way.

Implementer's css modules are consumed via css modules (passed as normal via `className`).

### Component consumption

If a field is supplied validation props (`minLength`, `required`, etc), the component will automatically trigger its fields ("form controls") to self-validate and display relevant errors upon submit. Each field supports supplying custom validation messages via the Constraints Validation API—when no custom message(s) are supplied, browser defaults (which are pretty good and support i18n for free) are used. A Form submitted with invalid fields will abort the submission (the supplied `onSubmit` callback will not be called).

Any props not specific to this package are passed to the relative element.

```jsx
import Form, {
  Button,
  FileInput,
  Input,
} from 'react-form5';

import AddressService from '../AddressService.js';
import ClientsService from '../ClientsService.js';

import yourCustomStyles from './something.module.css';


const validateAddress = (event) => {
  const { target } = event;
  const isInvalid = AddressService.validate(target.value);
  let msg = 'Address is not recognised';

  if (isInvalid) {
    if (typeof msg === 'boolean') msg = isInvalid;

    target.setCustomValidity(msg);
    target.reportValidity(); // required because reasons
  }
};

const validateDomain = (event) => {
  const { target } = event;
  const isInvalid = ClientsService.validate(target.value);
  let msg = 'Email address is not allowed';

  if (isInvalid) {
    if (typeof msg === 'boolean') msg = isInvalid;

    target.setCustomValidity(msg);
    target.reportValidity(); // required because reasons
  }
};

const sendToCloud = (
  delta,
  {
    forename,
    surname,
    contactDetails: {
      email,
      tel,
    },
    newsletterOptIn,
  },
  event,
) => {
  return fetch(…);
};

const SFC = (props) => (
  <Form
    className={yourCustomStyles.SignupForm}
    name="signup"
    onSubmit={sendToCloud}
  >
    <Input
      name="forename"
      minLength={2}
      placeholder="Jane"
      required
      type="text"
    />
    <Input
      name="surname"
      minLength={2}
      placeholder="Smith"
      required
      type="text"
    />
    <fieldset name="contactDetails">
      <Input
        name="email"
        onBlur={validateDomain}
        placeholder="jane@example.com"
        type="email"
      />
      <Input
        as="textarea"
        name="mailingAddress"
        onChange={validateAddress}
      />
      <Input
        name="tel"
        placeholder="5555555555"
        type="tel"
      />
    </fieldset>
    <Input
      name="newsletterOptIn"
      type="checkbox"
      variant={Input.VARIANTS.TOGGLE}
    />
    <Button
      appearance={Button.APPEARANCES.BASIC}
      type="submit"
    />
  </Form>
)
```

#### `<Form>`

This component facilitates validation and provides a data model object for uncontrolled fields. Fields wrapped in a name `fieldset` result in a nested object.

It also provides a `delta` of data changes, useful for `PATCH`ing existing field(s) changed by the user: the delta object contains only properties differing from their initial value. Ex an existing user changes their forename: `delta = { forename: 'Jakob' }`.

`<Form>` accepts a number of event handlers (the usual `onChange`, `onSubmit`, etc), as well as `onDirty` and `onPristine`, which are called when the form's `pristine` state changes; each is called only once per change (eg when the form becomes dirty and when it becomes `pristine` again after submit). These can be leveraged to, for instance, prevent submitting a pristine form (as you can partially see in the demo: the submit button is disabled, but the form itself doesn't consume `isDirty` so data objects can still be observed).

#### `<Button>`

The most important difference here is the `type` prop defaults to `button` instead of `submit` because forgetting to override "submit" has confusing, adverse behaviour.

Button supports the following configuration via props:

prop | purpose | default
:--- | :--- | :---
appearance | alter the aesthetics of the element | `primary`
fluid | whether the button should act like a liquid: fill its container | `false`
variant | the kind of appearance the button takes on (classic CTA, icon, etc) | `cta`

#### `<FileInput>`

A file picker for uploading from disk. The main difference between this component and this package's `<Input>` component is that it generates a preview for image-type files or lists filenames of selected files (when a preview cannot be generated).

#### `<Input>`

This component is a thin wrapper for native `label` and form fields (`input`, `select`, `textarea`)
that helps to ensure accessibility and facilitate validation. It leverages `onBlur` and `onChange`
listeners to track `pristine` and `touched` (to avoid erroneously invalidating the field); its
internal handlers are first called and then handlers passed via props.

To create a list of values within a single property, append `[]` to the `name` attribute, like `<Input name="foo[]" />`; to avoid conflicting with the likes of react, a number may optionally be included within the brackets, like `<Input name="foo[0]" />`, but the number (index) itself will be ignored (sequence in data objects is determined by the input's place in the DOM).

`<input>` also offers a small easter-egg: a toggle, which is effectively a checkbox with fancy styling.

prop | purpose | default
:--- | :--- | :---
arrangement | the fields position relative to its field | `inline`
as | the element or react component to use | `input`
variant | display a checkbox as a toggle | `null`
